=====
Toman
=====

A Constitution for the Commons
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:Abstract:

    This Member Agreement ("Constitution") serves as the organising framework
    for the Members ("Espians") of Metanational Commons Ltd. ("The Metanational
    Commons") -- incorporated as Company No. 6834341 in the United Kingdom.

    It has been ratified by the Espians: Tav (Vageesan Sivapathasundaram) and
    Sofia Bustamante.

.. contents::   Table of Contents
                :depth: 2
                :backlinks: none

.. raw:: html

  <style type="text/css">
    body { counter-reset: legalese; }
    h1, h2, h3 { font-family: Georgia; border-bottom: 0px; color: #620000; }
    #content em { color: #620000; font-style: normal; }
    #content h1 { border-bottom: 0px; margin-top: 0em; font-size: 1.2em; }
    h1.title { counter-reset: legalese; }
    .document h1:before {
      counter-increment: legalese; content: counter(legalese) ". " ;
    }
    h1.title:before { content: ""; }
    ol { counter-reset: legalsection; list-style-type: none; }
    ol li:before {
      counter-increment: legalsection; color: #620000;
      content: counter(legalese) "." counters(legalsection, ".") " ";
    }
    ol li { margin-top: 12px; padding-left: 2em; text-indent: -2em; }
    ol li > ol li { padding-left: 2em; text-indent: -3em; }
    #header { background-color: #620000; }
    #header img { display: none; }
    #header h1 { padding-left: 100px; }
  </style>

--------
Preamble
--------

The right of humanity to survive in this Universe is neither inalienable nor
guaranteed. It is by our actions


----------
Principles
----------

1. Melanin is a social enterprise committed to enabling and nurturing "true
   communities" around sustainable social, economic and environmental values.

2. Melanin is designed as a robust, network-based organisation that has at its
   core, a team and infrastructure that provides leadership, innovation and
   support services for this purpose.

1. Melanin is an "enabling organisation" that is built on shared principles of
   practise which all Espians subscribe to.

   1. *Rule of Ethics.*

   1. *Social Business.* Combining elements of a commercial enterprise with
      elements of a not-for-profit organisation, Melanin will not distribute
      profits to shareholders -- it has no shareholders -- and instead shares
      the financial and other values it produces equitably amongst Espians to
      further their social objectives.

   2. *Dignity.* By enabling people to have the freedom to access opportunities,
      contribute and be heard, Melanin seeks to raise the inherent value in
      local communities in a way that respects human dignity and potential. It's
      not just what you do but how you do it. A deep ecology approach.

   3. *Integrity.* The health of all communities, including Melanin's, is
      dependent on the inner and outer awareness and well-being of its members.
      An integral, holistic approach needs to be taken -- healing past damages
      appropriately -- in the process of becoming whole.

   4. *Peer-to-Peer.* Social technologies and processes can enable communities
      to self-organise and tack complex, real-world situations in pragmatic ways
      that is mutually beneficial for all involved -- so that higher values of
      social and economic justice can prevail.

   5. *United Diversity.* Melanin's decentralised and flexible structure is
      powered from the periphery and unified from the core -- fostering
      diversity, complexity and change in a way that counters the paradigm of
      command and control.

   6. *Self-Rule & Democracy.* Power, rights, responsibility and rewards are
      distributed equitably amongst Espians whilst ensuring that the cultures
      and conditions for learning, risk-taking and inter-disciplinary innovation
      are cultivated in ever expanding circles.

   7. *Transparency.* By being open and transparent, Melanin will act as an
      ethical bridge to help rebuild trust within communities -- trust often
      lost due to a lack of accountability by those in positions of
      responsibility regarding the commitments they have made towards achieving
      social equity.

   8. *Emergence.* The most meaningful connections and some of the most powerful
      outcomes happen without being planned. Melanin cultivates a dynamic mix
      of old and new worldviews, of top down and bottom up, of chaos and order
      and of leadership and participation -- such that higher forms of value and
      life unfold.

   9. *Cooperative Values.* Melanin recognises that "together, we have
      everything" and subscribes to the 1995 Statement of Cooperative Identity
      of the International Cooperative Alliance.

----------
Membership
----------

.. sidebar::  Attention

  Espians should understand that LLPs are tax transparent. Therefore it is up to
  all Espians to ensure that they pay the appropriate Income Tax, NI
  Contributions, Capital Gains Tax, &c. in their locality.

1. Melanin rests on equitable and mutual value exchange between Espians. A
   "Give-Get" framework guides this reciprocity.

   1. Membership is open to all who are willing to accept the associated
      responsibilities.

   2. Membership is made available without gender, social, racial, political or
      religious discrimination.

2. The efforts of Espians occur under specific Operational Contexts ("Contexts")
   and is valued in terms of Work Units ("Units").

   1. Rich picture.

   2. Registry ("Registry") -- transparent.

   3. The shared goals  work is carried out through policies approved by the democratic
      Membership body of Melanin.

3. Melanin is structured around three distinct classes of Membership. The first
   two classes are collectively referred to as the "Operational Espians".

   1. *Core Espians.* The servant leaders who provide the vision and embody the
      principles articulated in ยง 2.

   2. *Open Espians.* Individuals who are engaged on a full-time or near
      full-time basis.

   3. *Stakeholder Espians.* External parties who have enabled or benefited from
      the efforts by Operational Espians and thus.

4. Core Espians: Give

   1. Ensure quarterly reports are produced that include but that are not
      limited to: management accounts, strategic learning and priorities for the
      following quarter.

   2. Ensure that annual returns and accounts are filed with Companies House and
      partnership tax returns are sent to Her Majesty's Revenue & Customs.

5. Core Espians: Get

6. Open Espians: Give

   1. Tav a lot of love and attention.

   2. Responsive participation in online spaces framed around communities of
      practice.

7. Open Espians: Get

8. Stakeholder Espians: Give

9. Stakeholder Espians: Get

.. This Constitution shall commence on the Effective Date and shall continue in
   force for a year (at which point it will be renewed subject to review), or
   until terminated by either of the parties giving 6 months notice of
   termination in writing to the other party.

-------------------------------
Common Socio-Economic Protocols
-------------------------------

-------------------
Resource Management
-------------------

-------------------
Conflict Resolution
-------------------

1. Conflicts are a natural part of all endeavours.

2. Conflicts are seen as creative -- indicating differences of perspective from
   which all participants can learn. Solutions that best satisfy the underlying
   needs and desires of all related Espians will be attained using methods and
   processes that ensure that all parties are heard and understood.

3. Mediation.

4. Arbitration.

---------------------
Intellectual Property
---------------------

1. All original works ("Works") of authorship created by Espians (solely or
   jointly with others) -- except Stakeholder Espians -- within the scope of and
   during the period of Membership within Melanin and which are protectable by
   copyright are "works made for hire" for Melanin as that term is defined in
   the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

2. Melanin dedicates all copyright held in the Works to the public domain.

   1. Melanin makes this dedication for the benefit of the public at large and
      intends this dedication to be an overt act of relinquishment in perpetuity
      of all present and future rights under copyright law, whether vested or
      contingent, in the Work. Melanin understands that such relinquishment of
      all rights includes the relinquishment of all rights to enforce (by
      lawsuit or otherwise) those copyrights in the Work.

   2. Melanin recognizes that, once placed in the public domain, the Work may be
      freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, used, modified, built upon,
      or otherwise exploited by anyone for any purpose, commercial or
      non-commercial, and in any way, including by methods that have not yet
      been invented or conceived.

   3. All Works are distributed "as-is". All conditions, warranties and terms
      and undertakings express or implied statutory or otherwise are expressly
      excluded to the fullest extent permitted by law.

3. Espians grant Melanin with a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free license
   under any licensed patents they may have to make, have made, use, sell, offer
   for sale, import, and/or otherwise dispose of contributions to any and all
   Works.

4. Melanin complies with the Data Protection Act 1998, including all amending UK
   legislation and EU directives. Pursuant to the Act, beneficiaries of
   Melanin's services have the right to be informed of and to have access to all
   of the personally identifiable information held about them.

-----------
Small Print
-----------

1. General Provisions 
 
   1. This Constitution constitutes the entire agreement and understanding of the
      Espians and supersedes all prior oral or written agreements,
      understandings or arrangements relating to the subject matter of this
      Constitution. No Espian shall be entitled to rely on any agreement,
      understanding or arrangement which is not expressly contained in this
      Constitution.
 
   2. No failure or delay on the part of Espians to exercise any right or remedy
      under this Constitution shall be construed or operate as a waiver thereof.
      Nor shall any single or partial exercise of any right or remedy preclude
      the further exercise of such right or remedy as the case may be.

   3. This Constitution (including any provision hereof) -- whilst intended as a
      "living document" -- shall not be modified, amended, or waived except in
      writing signed by a two-thirds supermajority of Core Espians.
 
2. Interpretation
 
   1. The headings in this Constitution are for convenience only and shall not
      affect its construction.
 
   2. Where appropriate, words denoting the singular shall include the plural
      and vice versa.
 
   3. Reference to any statute or statutory provision includes a reference to
      the statute or statutory provision as from time to time amended, extended
      or re-enacted.

3. Severability 
 
   1. If any provision or term of this Constitution shall become or be declared
      illegal, invalid or unenforceable, the legality and validity of any other
      provision shall not be affected thereby. Any illegal, inconsistent or
      invalid provision of this Constitution shall be severable and all other
      provisions shall remain in full force and effect.

4. Third Party Rights 
 
   1. No third party shall have the right to enforce the terms of this
      Constitution whether pursuant to the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties)
      Act 1999 or otherwise.

5. Governing Law

   1. This Constitution and any contracts made under it shall be governed by and
      construed in accordance with the laws of England and Wales whose courts
      shall be the exclusive courts of competent jurisdiction.

---------------
Acknowledgments
---------------

* The ancient Greeks for having introduced democracy.

* The framers of the United States Constitution and the anonymous authors of the
  Federalist Papers for having had the courage and insight to pave the way with
  their efforts.

* Mahatma Gandhi and Buckminster Fuller for having been the change that they
  wanted to be and being inspirations for a better world.

* Kim Stanley-Robinson for having authored the visionary Mars Trilogy and the
  Martian Constitution in the fourth book, Martians. The terms "metanational",
  "eco-economy" and "gift economy" were adopted from his works.

* The anonymous author P.M. for having envisioned how decentralised societies
  could truly function in "Bolo'Bolo".

* Neal Stephenson for having explored the impacts of technology on society and
  for introducing the term "Common Economic Protocol" in his "Diamond Age".

* Dee Hock for having structured Visa Inc. in a more egalitarian form than
  traditional capitalist structures -- later promoted as "Chaordic" in his
  "Birth of the Chaordic Age".

* All the individuals throughout history who have helped form a better reality.

* The Universe for being so bountiful and having honoured us with life.